[charts] Document how plugins can be used (#19343)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/charts/plugins/plugins.md

---
title: Charts - Plugins
productId: x-charts
components: ChartContainer, ChartDataProvider
---

# Charts - Plugins

> <p class="description">The library relies on two system to perform data processing: the plugins and the series config.</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p class="description">The library relies on two systems to perform data processing: the plugins and the series config.</p>
```

:::warning
Those information are for advanced use-cases.
The large majority of charts should not require touching either to the plugins or the series configuration.
:::

## Plugins

> Plugins are function used to add features to the chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins are functions used to add features to the chart.
```

> They can process data, add internal state, and listen to some event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can process data, add internal state, or listen to events.
```

Plugins can be passed to the `<ChartContainer />` or the `<ChartDataProvider />` with the `plugins` props.

:::info

> Notice that `myChartPlugins` is defined of the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that `myChartPlugins` is defined outside of the component.
```

That's because plugins contain hooks and so their order should not be modified.
:::

```jsx
const myChartPlugins = [useChartInteraction, useChartHighlight];

function MyChart() {
  return <ChartContainer plugins={myChartPlugins}>// ...</ChartContainer>;
}
```

### Plugins per chart

The default array of plugins can be imported from the corresponding chart folder.
This allows you to get the exact same feature as the component while using composition.

```ts
// MIT package
import { PIE_CHART_PLUGINS, PieChartPluginsSignatures } from '@mui/x-charts/PieChart';
// pro package
import { PIE_CHART_PLUGINS, PieChartPluginsSignatures } from '@mui/x-charts-pro/PieChart';
import { PIE_CHART_PRO_PLUGINS, PieChartProPluginsSignatures } from '@mui/x-charts-pro/PieChartPro';

function MyPieChart() {
    return <ChartContainer plugins={PIE_CHART_PLUGINS}>
        // ...
    </ChartContainer>
}
```

### Plugins list

You can import plugins individually from `@mui/x-charts/plugins`.

> When creating your custom array of plugins, be aware that some plugins have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating your custom array of plugins, be aware that some plugins have dependencies.
```

- dependencies: plugins that need to be set before for them to work.
- optional dependencies: plugins that need to be set before to enable some features.

| Plugin                                             | Dependencies  | Optional dependency    |
| :------------------------------------------------- | :------------ | :--------------------- |

> | `useChartCartesianAxis`                            |               | Interaction            |

Author: I agree but it looks uggly

| `useChartPolarAxis`                                |               | Interaction            |
| `useChartHighlight`                                |               |                        |
| `useChartInteraction`                              |               |                        |
| `useChartVoronoi`                                  | CartesianAxis | Interaction, Highlight |
| `useChartZAxis`                                    |               |                        |
| `useChartProExport` <span class="plan-pro"></span> |               |                        |
| `useChartProZoom` <span class="plan-pro"></span>   | CartesianAxis |                        |

> ### Custom plugins
> 
> We discourage you from creating custom plugins.
> To simplify further development, we consider their implementation as internal, allowing ourself to break their interfaces to add or improve features.

Reviewer: This paragraph doesn't make a lot of sense to me, what do we consider internal? Why are plugins discouraged? 

Maybe put it in a `warn` block?

```suggestion
### Custom plugins

:::warn
Creating custom plugins is not encouraged.
:::

The plugin's internal implementation is not considered stable.
It can break at any time without a breaking change.
```

```ts
// Community package
import { PIE_CHART_PLUGINS, PieChartPluginSignatures } from '@mui/x-charts/PieChart';
// Pro package
import { PIE_CHART_PLUGINS, PieChartPluginSignatures } from '@mui/x-charts-pro/PieChart';
import { PIE_CHART_PRO_PLUGINS, PieChartProPluginSignatures } from '@mui/x-charts-pro/PieChartPro';

function MyPieChart() {
    return <ChartContainer plugins={PIE_CHART_PLUGINS}>
        {/* ... */}
    </ChartContainer>
}
```

### Plugins list

You can import plugins individually from `@mui/x-charts/plugins`.

When creating your custom array of plugins, be aware that some plugins have dependencies.

- dependencies: plugins that need to be set before for them to work.
- optional dependencies: plugins that need to be set before to enable some features.

For example, the `useChartClosestPoint` has the `useChartCartesianAxis` as a dependency and the `useChartHighlight` as an optional dependency. Then

- `[useChartClosestPoint, useChartCartesianAxis]` does not work because the closest point plugin is before the cartesian one.
- `[useChartCartesianAxis, useChartClosestPoint]` works because the cartesian plugin is set before the one for closest point.

> - `[useChartCartesianAxis, useChartClosestPoint, useChartHighlight]` works with limited feature. The highligh plugin being after the closest point one, you will get highlight feature, but not highlight based on closest point.

Author: ```suggestion
- `[useChartCartesianAxis, useChartClosestPoint, useChartHighlight]` works with limited feature. The highlight plugin being after the closest point one, you get the highlight feature, but not highlight based on closest point.
```

| `useChartCartesianAxis`                            |                         | `useChartInteraction`                          |
| `useChartPolarAxis`                                |                         | `useChartInteraction`                          |
| `useChartHighlight`                                |                         |                                                |
| `useChartInteraction`                              |                         |                                                |
| `useChartClosestPoint`                             | `useChartCartesianAxis` | `useChartInteraction`,<br/>`useChartHighlight` |
| `useChartZAxis`                                    |                         |                                                |
| `useChartProExport` <span class="plan-pro"></span> |                         |                                                |
| `useChartProZoom` <span class="plan-pro"></span>   | `useChartCartesianAxis` |                                                |

### Custom plugins

:::warning

> Creating custom plugins is not encouraged.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, sounds good 👍
